So how does authentication work in a rest API then?
Well we obviously still have our client and server and the client still sends authentication data
to the server,
so the email and the password let's say. In the past, we then would have checked that data on the server
and if it is valid, we would have established a session.
Now we don't use a session anymore because restful APIs are stateless,
they don't care about the client,
you learned about that strict decoupling of server and client and every request should be treated standalone,
that means every request should have all the data it needs to authenticate itself. With a session,
the server needs to store data about the client, the server then stores that a client is authenticated
and that's just not how rest APIs work. The server will not store anything about any client,
so we don't store sessions on a rest API and therefore this approach will not be used anymore.
Obviously we will still validate the input on the server, we'll still check for the validity of the e-mail
password combination
but then instead, we return a so-called token to the client. That token will be generated on the server
and will hold some information which can only be validated by the server
and this token will then be stored in the client,
so there in storage in the browser,
there are specific storage mechanisms for this
and the client can then attach this token to every subsequent request it sends to the server.
So this stored token is then attached to every request that targets a resource on the server which requires
authentication. That token can only be validated by the server which created the token
and if you change that token on the frontend or you try to create it to fake that you are authenticated,
that will be detected because the server used a certain algorithm for generating the token which you
can't fake because you don't know it or you don't know the private key
used by that server for generating the token to be precise. That token contains json data or
javascript data in the end plus a signature which as I mentioned is generated on the server with a
special private key which is only stored on the server
and this gives us a so-called json web token. This json web token is then returned to the client and
the signature
as I explained can only be verified by the server,
so you can't edit or create the token on the client.
Well you can but then the server will detect this and will treat the token as invalid.
This is how we generate the token or how we do authentication in rest
APIs.
We have the token which can be checked by the server but which does not to be stored on the server
and this gives us an elegant way of authenticating requests in a rest API world.
Now let's implement this.